---
path: articles
date: 2020-04-15T17:50:56.716Z
title: Credit Cards Belong In A Safe, Not In Your Wallet
description: "Learn how credit cards can be used wisely for a better life "
topimage: assets/credit-cards-in-wallet.jpg
---
<!--StartFragment-->

Having a credit card can be beneficial for many reasons. It can help in emergencies, it can build reward points for future purchases, gain airline miles, and most importantly build your credit score. The downsides to owning a credit card though can outweigh the benefits. At the end of the day if you count all those late fees and the interest charged over time it adds up to costing you more than you get in benefits. Even if you are making on time payments! Credit card companies want you to use the cards frequently so that they get more money out of you. That is why they provide benefits to intrigue more interest in them.

The easiest way to prevent yourself from giving away more of your hard earned money to the credit card companies is to get rid of the credit cards. The problem is if you cancel your credit cards you are not building up your credit score. Your credit score is what helps you get approved for loans, credit cards, and more importantly housing. The better credit score you have the better chances you have of getting approved for an apartment or dream home. So what can you do to avoid paying extra money to the credit card companies but still build your credit score?

I love Dave Ramsey’s solution to this dilemma where he suggests cutting up your credit cards. However, he doesn’t mention your credit score. If you cancel a credit card all together it affects your credit score. I have only cancelled a card once. It was an accident that I even had the card in the first place. A sales lady pushed the buttons and agreements for me before I even knew what I was signing up for. I had only agreed to get a reward points system at the store. She never mentioned it being a credit card and didn’t give me time to read the agreements on the screen. She handed me the brochure for the credit card after she had me sign up.

Needless to say I panicked. I told the manager of the store to cancel it because I was misled. It ended up showing up on my credit score and is still there today. It will eventually disappear after 7 years so I let it stay on there. I figured it would be too hard to dispute and would eventually go away on its own. However for a while it dropped my score significantly for having cancelled a line of available credit.

What would have been a smarter idea would have been to keep the account and just not use it. That could have meant cutting up the physical card but keeping the account. I also could have taken the card and put it in a safe place at home where it wasn’t as accessible. The reasoning is because credit card companies, loans brokers, apartments, and mortgage companies look at your credit report. They are looking to see if you’re responsible enough with your open credit lines to make on time payments and not cancel them. The more active lines of credit in good standing with usage under 30% and on time payments being made the more likely you are to get approved. They want to have reassurance that you are going to pay them on time, keep a running balance, and keep the credit line open.

My suggestion now is to take your credit cards out of your wallet and put them in a safe place like a fireproof safe for instance. If you have an abundance of credit cards I would suggest taking ones that are not used as much and cutting them up. So that you are unable to use them anymore. Take the ones you use frequently and lock them up in a safe in your home. This is done so you won’t be tempted to take them out of your wallet at the store. Start trying to use cash or a debit card that is tied to your bank account for all future purchases.

Start paying down any outstanding debt on your credit cards. Use all the money you can to pay down that debt but remember to save enough to meet your essential needs (click here to see the definition of essential needs). See my other articles about making a budget and getting more cash flow if you need more income to make this work. Your goal is to be debt free as quickly as possible but it will take months to years depending on where you stand today in your finances.

Your credit score will increase as you pay off your debt. Even if you have a poor credit score you can improve it. My suggestion is to limit your access to your cards and pay them off. If you don’t have a credit card I suggest getting one and not using it unless it's an emergency (click here to see what is considered an emergency). Unless you can pay full cash for a house you will not be able to get approved for a loan or an apartment without some kind of credit score. The better score you have the better your chances are for getting approved. Read more about credit scores by clicking here.

The whole point of locking up credit cards in a safe is because it is too tempting to continue using them when they are in your wallet. Me and my husband agreed to stop using ours about a year ago. My self discipline was kind of shameful. I would still use the card here and there. I ended up using it more than I used my debit card. I kept telling myself I would build reward points and pay it off right away. I did pay off my card more often but then I realized I had $700 outstanding on my card again after having fully paid it off only 3 months prior. Clearly I wasn’t listening to my own advice.

When I found out my husband had maxed out his card at $2,000 in just a few months. He had let it sit there for months gaining interest completely maxed out before he told me because he was too ashamed. That hurt not only our finances but our trusting relationship. That is when I decided to put the credit cards away. They are now out of sight and out of mind in a fireproof safe.

That was done about 2 months ago and now my credit card is paid off. My husband’s is down to $800 which I expect to be paid off next month. Let me just tell you that neither one of us misses our credit cards either. It is almost like they are gone or never existed. It feels like a heavy weight was lifted off of us. All because we hid them away from our everyday activities and are working towards paying them off.

In just the last month my credit score skyrocketed to an excellent score of 786. This strategy actually works and lifts a heavy burden on finances and relationships. The only reason I have not cancelled the credit card account all together is because of my credit report. Go to my other article about credit reports and scores for the full explanation. The main point you need to take away is to hide away your credit cards in a safe spot or cut them up. Pay off the outstanding debt and you will be in a lot better of a place.

<!--EndFragment-->